---
layout: default
nopage_baseurl: https://github.com/Ericsson/zoti/tree/main
---

# Overview

In accordance to its [design philosophy][philosophy], ZOTI aims at
solving the problem of code synthesis by formulating it as a sequence
of mode-to-model transformations. In doing so, it decomposes this
problem into basic tasks which can be combined and scripted into
meaningful translation algorithms (also called in this context
*synthesis flows*).

[philosophy]: {{ "/" | prepend: site.baseurl | append: "#motivation--philosophy" }}

The ZOTI suite consists of specialized tools that help with the basic
tasks presented as [some concrete cases][cases] when scripting custom
synthesis flows. Regardless of source or target models, a ZOTI flow
would roughly follow the schematic below.

[cases]: {{ "/" | prepend: site.baseurl | append: "#some-concrete-cases" }}

{% include image_caption.html url="/assets/images/zoti_flow.png"
	description="The general ZOTI synthesis flow. Each circle
	represents the problem domain of a specific tool. It depends on an
	unambiguous system description, possibly generated by a
	model-driven decision process. The generated artifacts are meant
	to be handed over to platform-specific CAD tools, e.g.,
	compilers, deploying agents, etc. " %}

The ZOTI tools and their relation to one another is suggestively
represented in the drawing above. As of today, these tools are:

[ZOTI-Graph]({{ "/zoti-graph" | prepend: site.baseurl }})
: a graph-based internal representation format and API for describing,
  annotating and manipulating system models.

[ZOTI-FTN]({{ "/zoti-ftn" | prepend: page.nopage_baseurl }})
: a data type representation format and engine focusing on generating
  glue code for various target languages.
  
[ZOTI-Gen]({{ "/zoti-gen" | prepend: page.nopage_baseurl }})
: a template engine that takes care of managing libraries of prebuilt
  component templates and combining them for constructing target
  artifacts. The construction is dictated by a (set of) *code blocks
  spec* model(s) resulted from previous model-to-model transformations.

[ZOTI-Tran]({{ "/zoti-tran" | prepend: page.nopage_baseurl }})
: a minimal set of scripting utilities and general-purpose
  transformations to jumpstart the design of a new synthesis flow.
  This sets up the main playground for describing a target-specific
  flow from *system spec* to *code blocks spec* using all the
  available tools.

[ZOTI-YAML]({{ "/zoti-yaml" | prepend: site.baseurl }})
: an extension of the YAML language introducing modules, some crude
  component-like imports and various tree manipulation utilities built
  for conveninence. It outputs standard JSON and YAML, hence it can be
  used to pre-process data for any other tool that uses serialized
  data formats.

