---
layout: default
nopage_baseurl: https://github.com/Ericsson/zoti/tree/main
---

# Genny

Genny, or "the ZOTI code generator", is a synthesis flow tasked with
solving the problem of translating declarative system models into
deployable target code. This problem can be visualized as below as
transforming a graph-like model capturing *relations* between
constituent components, into a blocks structure representing *glue and
boilerplate* code.

{% include image_caption.html
	url="/assets/images/problem_depiction.png"
	scale=400 description="Illustration of the translation problem. The
	declarative specification model usually depicts a graph-like
	structure describing components and relations between them. On the
	other hand, the target model shows a structure which represents
	hierarchical blocks of code consistently glued together. Most
	often the original structure does not resemble to the resulted
	one, much rather needs to undergo a series of transformations that
	preserve the declared semantics in terms of target mechanisms."
	%}
	
In accordance to the ZOTI [design goals][philosophy], Genny decomposes
this problem into a sequence of sub-problems formulated as
model-to-model transformations below. As such, Genny can
be the base for various *model-to-text* tools tailored for custom
target platforms from (virtually) the same input format.

[philosophy]: {{ "/" | prepend: site.baseurl | append: "#goals-and-key-principles" }}


{% include image_caption.html url="/assets/images/zoti_flow.png"
	description="The Genny synthesis flow. Each circle represents the
	problem domain of a specific tool. It depends on an unambiguous
	system description, possibly generated by a model-driven decision
	process. The generated artifacts are meant to be handed over to
	platform-specific CAD tools, e.g., compilers, deploying agents,
	etc. " %}

The sub-problems associated with tools can be formulated as follows:

Graph Description ([ZOTI-Graph]({{ "/zoti-graph" | prepend: site.baseurl }}))
: is the extraction of the *solved system model* into a parseable
  graph-based intermediate format. In this case, a solved system model
  represents the output of a design space exploration process
  capturing every aspect of an implementation, e.g., application,
  mapping, scheduling, resource allocation, etc., such that the
  remaining process is only a matter of clerical translation to a
  deployable (SW) artifact. For this purpose, in our use cases we use
  an instance of [ZOTI-Graph][zoti-graph].

Flexible Type Description ([ZOTI-FTN][zoti-ftn])
: is the extraction of target-agnostic type information for all data
  flowing through the system, for the purpose of generating
  target-specific glue code, In our use-cases we use the
  [ZOTI-FTN][zoti-ftn] format.

Graph-to-Blocks translation
: represents custom-tailored scripts which gradually translate the
  graph format into a blocks structure. In our use cases the scripts
  are making heavy use of the APIs of [ZOTI-Graph][zoti-graph] and
  [ZOTI-FTN][zoti-ftn], and the target format is meant to be parsed by
  [ZOTI-Gen][zoti-gen].
  
Template Expansion ([ZOTI-Gen][zoti-gen])
: is the final stage of translating the blocks structure into
  consistent target code by means of selecting and expanding templates
  from libraries of pre-written target-specific boilerplate code and
  combining them based on the previously-generated target-specific
  glue code. In our use cases we use the [ZOTI-Gen][zoti-gen] template
  expander.

[zoti-graph]: {{ "/zoti-graph" | prepend: site.baseurl }})
[zoti-ftn]: {{ "/zoti-ftn" | prepend: site.baseurl }})
[zoti-gen]: {{ "/zoti-gen" | prepend: site.baseurl }})

Check the [Examples]({{ "/example" | prepend: site.baseurl }}) page
for a list of ublished use-cases that implement instances of Genny.
